course-overview.md, before:

# BISC 890 Directed Readings - Data Wrangling and Presentation in R

## Course Description
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Vivamus consectetur mattis urna, ut malesuada justo luctus et. Vestibulum id felis ipsum. Integer condimentum ipsum sit amet justo interdum, sit amet convallis purus porttitor. Vestibulum sodales porttitor tortor, facilisis sollicitudin nisi volutpat viverra. Nam tincidunt sollicitudin lorem. Curabitur ligula orci, aliquam vel sodales in, eleifend facilisis ipsum. Vestibulum varius turpis ut sem tempor, in tincidunt lectus accumsan. Vivamus id condimentum justo, eget adipiscing quam. Sed gravida leo a nisl consectetur, nec iaculis felis sodales. Proin feugiat tempus felis, et scelerisque velit tempus cursus.

We will meet 2 hours each week for 6 weeks. Students will receive 1 course credit, graded pass/fail for this course.

## Course Highlights
- We will meet for 2 hours each week for 6 weeks
- Targetted new and experienced R users
- Learn basic R commands and usage
- Produce high quality graphics using base plot and ggplot
- Start analyzing your data quickly by reformatting it using plyr and reshape
- Begin using markdown and R together to generate reports and annotate your code

## Course Overview
### Before we start
- install R version 3 or above
- install R Studio
- install markdown editor (optional)

### Topics covered
- Intro to R and markdown
- R basic graphics
- R advanced graphics (ggplot)
- Additional graphics customizations
- Data manipulation in R: `plyr` and `reshape`

### Course Objectives

Commit message:

Added course description
If you have any changes for the course description go ahead and make
them. The next thing we should do is come up with Learning Objectives
for each section.

course-overview.md, after:

# BISC 890 Directed Readings - Data Wrangling and Visualization in R

## Course Description
When presenting research "a picture is worth a 1000 words", however how do you make you clear and appealing graphics? The *R* programming language is predominately known for statistical analysis, but *R* is also capable of producing publication quality figures that can be embedded into blogs, and publications. In addition to its core functionality, sophisticated visualization in *R* is enhanced by supplemental packages, most notably the `ggplot2` library. In this course we move beyond basic plotting and highlight some of the more powerful approaches for visualization in *R*. We will explain the syntax for base `plot` and `ggplot2` in order to customize figures. This course will also cover the use of the `plyr` and `reshape2` packages, which are useful tools to format data sets before plotting, or analysis. This course is applicable to all students who those who have never used R before and those who have used R, but have not accessed its higher powered data manipulation and graphing capabilities. This course additionally will cover the basics of making reproducible documents for research purposes, and even blogs using the Markdown markup language.

We will meet 2 hours each week for 6 weeks. Students will receive 1 course credit, graded pass/fail for this course.

## Course Instructors

 - Franz Simon
 - Sean Anderson
 - Alex Chubaty
 - Corey Phillis

## Course Highlights
- We will meet for 2 hours each week for 6 weeks
- Targeted for new and experienced R users
- Learn basic R commands and usage
- Produce high quality graphics using base plot and ggplot
- Start analyzing your data quickly by reformatting it using plyr and reshape
- Begin using markdown and R together to generate reports and annotate your code

## Course Overview
### Before we start
- Install R version 3 or above
- Install R Studio
- Install markdown editor (optional)

### Topics covered
- Intro to R and markdown
- R basic graphics
- R advanced graphics (ggplot)
- Additional graphics customization
- Data manipulation in R: `plyr` and `reshape`

### Course Objectives

 - Learn how to make reproducible documents
 - Learn how to manage data and prepare it for analysis and presentation
 - Learn the grammar of `base` plot and `ggplot2`
 - Learn the basics of aesthetics
 - Become aware of open access software
