01-intro/slides_lec_01.md, before:

% Data Wrangling & Presentation in R
% Alex Chubaty, Franz Simon, Sean Anderson, Corey Phillis
% Fall 2013

---------------------

## ![Rlogo](images/Rlogo.png) + ![mdlogo](images/mdlogo.png)

### Course Instructors

- Alex Chubaty **B7250** [achubaty@sfu.ca](mailto:achubaty@sfu.ca)
- Corey Phillis **B6226** [cphillis@sfu.ca](mailto:cphillis@sfu.ca)
- Franz Simon **B7250** [fsimon@sfu.ca](mailto:fsimon@sfu.ca)
- Sean Anderson **B6226** [scanders@sfu.ca](mailto:scanders@sfu.ca)

---------------------

## Course Highlights

- Meet for 2 hours bi-weekly (6 classes)
- New and experienced R users welcome
- We'll cover:
    - Basic R commands and usage
    - Producing high-quality graphics using R
    - Constructing custom figures
    - Manipulating data quickly
    - Using Markdown + R to generate reproducible reports

---------------------

## Lecture Schedule

- Introduction to Markdown & R
- R base graphics
- Data manipulation in R
- R grid graphics
- Custom and advanced plotting
- Extras and additions

---------------------

## Assignments

- Apply the skills learned and practice using R
- Assignments are due at the start of class
- All assignments will be written in Markdown format

---------------------

# Before we start

- Install R version 3.0.0 or higher from [CRAN](http://cran.stat.sfu.ca)
- Install R Studio from [rstudio.org](http://www.rstudio.com/ide/download/desktop)
- make sure the `knitr` package is installed

```
install.packages("knitr")
library(knitr)
```

---------------------

# Introduction to Markdown

**Why use Markdown?**

- philosophy: "easy to read; easy to write"
- easily converted to other file types (`.doc`, `.html`, `.pdf`, etc.) using [Pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/)
- text files will always be supported/accessible (non-proprietary file format)
- text files are happy with Git version control; binary files (e.g., `.doc`, `.docx`) aren't
- we can easily embed code in our documents
    - advanced annotation of R code

---------------------

## Basic Syntax:

- paragraphs seperated by new line
- emphasis using `**bold**` and `*italics*`
- headers using `#`, `##`, `###`, etc.
- ordered lists using `1.`
- unordered lists using `-`
- blockquotes using `>`
- code using backticks
- links using `[link text](http://link_target)`
- images using `![picture caption](image.jpg)`

---------------------

## Advanced Syntax
- citations (not covered)

---------------------

# Introduction to R
## What is R?

- [www.r-project.org](http://www.r-project.org)
- Free (gratis/libre) software environment for statistical computing and graphics
- Cross-platform (Windows, OSX, Linux)

---------------------

## Why use R?

- customization
- complexity
- control
- it's *free*

---------------------

## Using R

- R is a command line tool
    - commands can be entered one line at a time
    - or by executing the contents of a script file
- we will use rstudio IDE
- pressing `⇧` in the R terminal will recall the previous command

---------------------

## Getting help with R

- `?` and `??`
- Google
- R Stack Exchange

---------------------

## R studio

![](images/rstudio.png)

---------------------

## Basic R Syntax

```
?
#
<-
=
()
{}
[]
:
;
""
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
###Assigning variables

```
x <- 3
y <- 5.291
z <- 2 * pi

X <- 3.8
Y <- -45
Z <- exp(1)
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
### Assigning vectors

```
a <- c(11.2, 33.4, 16.7, 13.2, 7.8, -23.5)
b <- c(1:10)
d <- seq(from=0, to=1, by=0.1)
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
### Assigning variables

```
name <- "Alex"
names <- c("Alex", "Brian", "Conan", "Dave", "Erin", "Franz")
colr <- list("red", "green", "blue")
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
### Arithmetic

```
+
-
*
/
```

### Powers

```
exp()
^
log()
log10()
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
### Mathematical functions

```
sum()
abs()
mean()
sd()
sqrt()
```

---------------------

## R Markdown

- Use R Studio to produce `.Rmd` files
- Embed R code, with solutions and figures

```{r}
summary(cars, eval=TRUE)
```

```{r fig.width=7, fig.height=6}
plot(cars)
```

```
two plus two = `r 2+2`
```

---------------------

## Data Types

- R treats different data in different ways
- R will automatically select what it thinks is the appropriate data type
- However, you may need/want to specify data types yourself
- R uses numeric and string variables, lists, arrays, matrices, dataframes

---------------------

## Data Types

```
is()

is.na()

as()
```

---------------------

## An example

```
# sample data from the trees dataset
summary(trees)

?trees # tells us about the dataset

### Height is in feet
### Girth (diameter) is in inches measured at 4'6”
### Volume is in cubic feet

radii <- trees$Girth / 2

radii.ft <- radii / 12

volumes <- pi * (radii.ft)^2 * trees$Height

trees$Volume
```

---------------------

# Working with data in R

---------------------

## Importing and viewing data

```
setwd("path/to/data/directory")
data <- read.csv("filename.csv", header=TRUE )
summary(data)
```

```
head(data)
tail(data)
names(data)
```

```
which()
```

---------------------

## Using additional packages

```
install.packages("plyr")
require(plyr)
```

---------------------

## Sample R script

```
# change working directory
setwd("path/to/working/directory")

# install/load additional packages
if (!require(lme4)) {
	install.packages("lme4"); library(lme4)
}

# import data
data <- read.csv("filename.csv", header=TRUE)

# first-look at the data
head(data)
summary(data)

# clean up data
...

# visualize the data
...

# analyse the data
...

```

---------------------

## Control operators

---------------------

### Conditional statements

```
if (condition1) {
	doThisThing
} else {
	doAnotherThing
}
```

### Evaluation of conditions

```
<
>
==
<=
<=
!=
&&
||
```

---------------------

### Loops
- `for` loops are used when the number of iterations in *known*
- `while` loops are used when the number of iterations is *unknown*

```
pies <- numeric(100)
for (i in 1:length(pies)) {
	pies[i] <- pi * i
}
```

```
x <- 0; done=FALSE
while (!done) {
	if (x > 23) {
		done = TRUE
	} else {
		x <- x + pi
	}
	print(x, digits=4)
}
```

Commit message:

Change .doc to .docx Add additional syntax links
Pandoc can only convert to .docx. I've also added some links under
the Markdown additional syntax section to knitcitations package and
an example of a full manuscript written in Markdown

01-intro/slides_lec_01.md, after:

% Data Wrangling & Presentation in R
% Alex Chubaty, Franz Simon, Sean Anderson, Corey Phillis
% Fall 2013

---------------------

## ![Rlogo](images/Rlogo.png) + ![mdlogo](images/mdlogo.png)

### Course Instructors

- Alex Chubaty **B7250** [achubaty@sfu.ca](mailto:achubaty@sfu.ca)
- Corey Phillis **B6226** [cphillis@sfu.ca](mailto:cphillis@sfu.ca)
- Franz Simon **B7250** [fsimon@sfu.ca](mailto:fsimon@sfu.ca)
- Sean Anderson **B6226** [scanders@sfu.ca](mailto:scanders@sfu.ca)

---------------------

## Course Highlights

- Meet for 2 hours bi-weekly (6 classes)
- New and experienced R users welcome
- We'll cover:
    - Basic R commands and usage
    - Producing high-quality graphics using R
    - Constructing custom figures
    - Manipulating data quickly
    - Using Markdown + R to generate reproducible reports

---------------------

## Lecture Schedule

- Introduction to Markdown & R
- R base graphics
- Data manipulation in R
- R grid graphics
- Custom and advanced plotting
- Extras and additions

---------------------

## Assignments

- Apply the skills learned and practice using R
- Assignments are due at the start of class
- All assignments will be written in Markdown format

---------------------

# Before we start

- Install R version 3.0.0 or higher from [CRAN](http://cran.stat.sfu.ca)
- Install R Studio from [rstudio.org](http://www.rstudio.com/ide/download/desktop)
- make sure the `knitr` package is installed

```
install.packages("knitr")
library(knitr)
```

---------------------

# Introduction to Markdown

**Why use Markdown?**

- philosophy: "easy to read; easy to write"
- easily converted to other file types (`.docx`, `.html`, `.pdf`, etc.) using [Pandoc](http://johnmacfarlane.net/pandoc/)
- text files will always be supported/accessible (non-proprietary file format)
- text files are happy with Git version control; binary files (e.g., `.doc`, `.docx`) aren't
- we can easily embed code in our documents
    - advanced annotation of R code

---------------------

## Basic Syntax:

- paragraphs seperated by new line
- emphasis using `**bold**` and `*italics*`
- headers using `#`, `##`, `###`, etc.
- ordered lists using `1.`
- unordered lists using `-`
- blockquotes using `>`
- code using backticks
- links using `[link text](http://link_target)`
- images using `![picture caption](image.jpg)`

---------------------

## Advanced Syntax
- citations (not covered)
	- [for more info](http://carlboettiger.info/2012/05/30/knitcitations.html) see `knitcitations` package 
- write a full manuscript in Markdown! (not covered)
	- But it can be done. [See Ethan White's example on GitHub](https://github.com/ethanwhite/data-sharing-paper)  	  

---------------------

# Introduction to R
## What is R?

- [www.r-project.org](http://www.r-project.org)
- Free (gratis/libre) software environment for statistical computing and graphics
- Cross-platform (Windows, OSX, Linux)

---------------------

## Why use R?

- customization
- complexity
- control
- it's *free*

---------------------

## Using R

- R is a command line tool
    - commands can be entered one line at a time
    - or by executing the contents of a script file
- we will use rstudio IDE
- pressing `⇧` in the R terminal will recall the previous command

---------------------

## Getting help with R

- `?` and `??`
- Google
- R Stack Exchange

---------------------

## R studio

![](images/rstudio.png)

---------------------

## Basic R Syntax

```
?
#
<-
=
()
{}
[]
:
;
""
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
###Assigning variables

```
x <- 3
y <- 5.291
z <- 2 * pi

X <- 3.8
Y <- -45
Z <- exp(1)
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
### Assigning vectors

```
a <- c(11.2, 33.4, 16.7, 13.2, 7.8, -23.5)
b <- c(1:10)
d <- seq(from=0, to=1, by=0.1)
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
### Assigning variables

```
name <- "Alex"
names <- c("Alex", "Brian", "Conan", "Dave", "Erin", "Franz")
colr <- list("red", "green", "blue")
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
### Arithmetic

```
+
-
*
/
```

### Powers

```
exp()
^
log()
log10()
```

---------------------

## Basic Commands
### Mathematical functions

```
sum()
abs()
mean()
sd()
sqrt()
```

---------------------

## R Markdown

- Use R Studio to produce `.Rmd` files
- Embed R code, with solutions and figures

```{r}
summary(cars, eval=TRUE)
```

```{r fig.width=7, fig.height=6}
plot(cars)
```

```
two plus two = `r 2+2`
```

---------------------

## Data Types

- R treats different data in different ways
- R will automatically select what it thinks is the appropriate data type
- However, you may need/want to specify data types yourself
- R uses numeric and string variables, lists, arrays, matrices, dataframes

---------------------

## Data Types

```
is()

is.na()

as()
```

---------------------

## An example

```
# sample data from the trees dataset
summary(trees)

?trees # tells us about the dataset

### Height is in feet
### Girth (diameter) is in inches measured at 4'6”
### Volume is in cubic feet

radii <- trees$Girth / 2

radii.ft <- radii / 12

volumes <- pi * (radii.ft)^2 * trees$Height

trees$Volume
```

---------------------

# Working with data in R

---------------------

## Importing and viewing data

```
setwd("path/to/data/directory")
data <- read.csv("filename.csv", header=TRUE )
summary(data)
```

```
head(data)
tail(data)
names(data)
```

```
which()
```

---------------------

## Using additional packages

```
install.packages("plyr")
require(plyr)
```

---------------------

## Sample R script

```
# change working directory
setwd("path/to/working/directory")

# install/load additional packages
if (!require(lme4)) {
	install.packages("lme4"); library(lme4)
}

# import data
data <- read.csv("filename.csv", header=TRUE)

# first-look at the data
head(data)
summary(data)

# clean up data
...

# visualize the data
...

# analyse the data
...

```

---------------------

## Control operators

---------------------

### Conditional statements

```
if (condition1) {
	doThisThing
} else {
	doAnotherThing
}
```

### Evaluation of conditions

```
<
>
==
<=
<=
!=
&&
||
```

---------------------

### Loops
- `for` loops are used when the number of iterations in *known*
- `while` loops are used when the number of iterations is *unknown*

```
pies <- numeric(100)
for (i in 1:length(pies)) {
	pies[i] <- pi * i
}
```

```
x <- 0; done=FALSE
while (!done) {
	if (x > 23) {
		done = TRUE
	} else {
		x <- x + pi
	}
	print(x, digits=4)
}
```
